ktimer: Timer management for F9 Microkernel

CONTENTS:

1. Ktimer Introduction
2. How Does Ktimer Work
3. How Tick is Implemented
4. Tickless

1. Ktimer Introduction

Conceptually speaking, L4 microkernel delivers a hardware interrupt as
a synchronous IPC message to a user-level thread which registered with
the kernel as the handler thread for that interrupt. The interrupt messages
appear to be sent by special in-kernel interrupt threads set up by L4 at
registration time, one per interrupt. Each interrupt message is delivered
to exactly one handler, however a thread can be registered to handle
different interrupts.

The timer tick interrupt is the only one managed internally by L4 while F9
microkernel follows the same manner as other L4 implementations do. Ktimer
is the kernel handler managing timer tick interrupt for F9.


2. How Does Ktimer Work?

The scheduler starts at the highest priority and checks if there is a thread
ready to run. In this case, the thread is selected for dispatch. If no thread
is ready to run, a special idle thread is dispatched. While the current
thread blocks, yields, or exhausts its timeslice, the next thread in that
priority class is dispatched and given a new timeslice.

However, timeslice accounting is slightly inaccurate as it happens in the
handler of the periodic timer interrupt by subtracting the length of the timer
period from the remaining timeslice length. If the remaining timeslice becomes
zero or negative, it is said to be exhausted, causing an immediate scheduling
process. If the thread blocks in between two timer ticks, the next thread will
start with only half a timer period till the next timer tick.

Threads that are blocked during IPC can be unblocked either by completing
their IPC or aborting it due to a timeout. With many blocked threads in a
system, it would be infeasible to check all blocked threads' timeouts on each
timer tick interrupt. Instead, F9 maintains a list of timeouts, with the one
closest to its expiry at the head of the list. This only requires to check a
single timeout at each tick (and would even allow tickless implementations,
setting the timer to min[timeslice length, earliest timeout] on each kernel
exit), but requires a clever data structure to keep track of the timeouts.

Kernel configurations:
- CONFIG_KTIMER_HEARTBEAT
  hardware cycles per ktimer tick

- CONFIG_KTIMER_MINTICKS
  minimum ktimer ticks unit for time event

- CONFIG_KTIMER_TICKLESS
  enable tickless


3. How Tick is Implemented

Hardware timer device issues interrupts within a programmable interval,
handling ticks in timeout ISR. For ARM implementations, there are two kinds
of timer:

- Incremental timer
  Example: Cortex-A9 MP Global Timer

- Counting down timer
  Example: Cortex-M4 SysTick

Also, there is prescaler tweaking hardware tick period. Once timeout ISR is
triggered, system ticks increase and handler of timeout event is executed. In
addition, operating system would re-schedule if required.


4. Tickless

When tickless is enabled, kernel enters tickless right before going to CPU
idle state. And then, it sets the interval of next timer interrupt as delta
of next event (or KTIMER_MAXTICKS). Finally, system time is adjusted after
kernel wakes up.

Tickless increases the number of instructions executed on the path to and from
the idle loop. Also, the systems with aggressive real-time response constraints
often run periodic tick.
